When the old man saw him coming he knew that this was a shark that had no fear at
all and would do exactly what he wished. He prepared the harpoon and made the rope
fast while he watched the shark come on. The rope was short as it lacked what he had cut
away to lash the fish.
The old man’s head was clear and good now and he was full of resolution but he had
little hope. It was too good to last, he thought. He took one look at the great fish as he
watched the shark close in. It might as well have been a dream, he thought. I cannot keep
him from hitting me but maybe I can get him. Dentuso, he thought. Bad luck to your
mother.
The shark closed fast astern and when he hit the fish the old man saw his mouth
open and his strange eyes and the clicking chop of the teeth as he drove forward in the
meat just above the tail. The shark’s head [101] was out of water and his back was coming
out and the old man could hear the noise of skin and flesh ripping on the big fish when he
rammed the harpoon down onto the shark’s head at a spot where the line between his
eyes intersected with the line that ran straight back from his nose. There were no such
lines. There was only the heavy sharp blue head and the big eyes and the clicking,
thrusting all-swallowing jaws. But that was the location of the brain and the old man hit
it. He hit it with his blood mushed hands driving a good harpoon with all his strength. He
hit it without hope but with resolution and complete malignancy.
The shark swung over and the old man saw his eye was not alive and then he swung
over once again, wrapping himself in two loops of the rope. The old man knew that he
was dead but the shark would not accept it. Then, on his back, with his tail lashing and
his jaws clicking, the shark plowed over the water as a speedboat does. The water was
white where his tail beat it and three-quarters of his body was clear above the water when
the rope came taut, shivered, and then snapped. The shark lay quietly for a little while on
the surface and the old man watched him. Then he went down very slowly.
[102] “He took about forty pounds,” the old man said aloud. He took my harpoon too
and all the rope, he thought, and now my fish bleeds again and there will be others. He
did not like to look at the fish anymore since he had been mutilated. When the fish had
been hit it was as though he himself were hit. But I killed the shark that hit my fish, he
thought. And he was the biggest dentuso that I have ever seen. And God knows that I
have seen big ones. It was too good to last, he thought. I wish it had been a dream now
and that I had never hooked the fish and was alone in bed on the newspapers.
“But man is not made for defeat,” he said. “A man can be destroyed but not
defeated.” I am sorry that I killed the fish though, he thought. Now the bad time is
coming and I do not even have the harpoon. The dentuso is cruel and able and strong and
intelligent. But I was more intelligent than he was. Perhaps not, he thought. Perhaps I
was only better armed.
